All right.
Welcome back.
This will be really quick.
I just want to touch on some of the built in Array methods.
There are many of them and I want to stress that you do not need to know or memorize any of this information
but hopefully it makes sense as to how we arrive at the numbers when we're talking about Big O notation.
So again I have a little emoji.
You don't need to know all this but let's take a look.
The first four we've already discussed maybe not by name but push and pop are constant time adding and
removing data to the end of the array of any array whether it's one item or 10000 or a million items
is Constantine.
It's easy there's no reindexing involved.
We just put it at the end and give it a spot.
That's basically it shifting in and shift.
On the other hand are a little more troublesome because we potentially have to re-index will not potentially
we have to re-index every element in the array.
If you're adding to the beginning or removing from the beginning.
So as the number of elements grows to 10000 or a million then the number of things we have to re-index
grows in proportion with that.
So it's over in it's linear time.
So those for adding and removing which we've discussed trying to highlight the top four won't though.
OK well let's.
That's the best I can do.
Next up we've got this little chunk of concat slice in Splice.
So all of these are over in linear time and there can be some confusion.
Something that concat takes multiple arrays and merges them together.
And when we say oh havan you might think that that just implies you know one array of elements and we're
acting on that one array.
What happens when there's two.
Technically you could argue that it should be you know 0 0 of and plus am Where am would be the size
of the second array.
But oh of and it's fine.
It's basically just expressing the fact that as these are raised grow that you're merging.
So is the time that it's going to take and it grows in proportion with the size the total size of the
new array at the end.
What else do we have slice and splice.
So slice is going to return a copy of part of an array or the entire thing if you want it to.
So then in this case refers to the fact that if we try to copy 10 elements versus 1000 elements from
an array the amount of time takes grows in proportion with that size.
How large of a copy or how many elements we're trying to copy.
So that's open.
And then lastly would we have splice.
Where are you splice.
There you go and splice is going to remove and add new elements and splice is a little different because
it's it's quite versatile.
So we can insert at the beginning of an array.
We could also insert at the very end of an array we can replace given elements.
But in general it's over and if we're inserting in the middle of the array we just simplify that to.
And remember that does mean shifting and re-indexing everything that comes after it.
So even if it's only in the middle we would still say it's over and even if it's 0 of and divided by
two.
We just don't care about that.
So in general a lot of things working with arrays are 0 of n you may have noticed this one down here
sort of sort of and log.
And so we're not going to talk about how this is derived where the log comes in where the end comes
in why they're multiplied.
We spend a lot of time talking about sorting algorithms and there are many of them out there.
We talked about six or seven I think it's seven but I'm not positive.
We talk about a lot of them and some of them we talk about have the time complexity of O and log in.
So we'll explain how we get there but just know that the time it takes to sort an array is larger than
just 0.
And we have to make comparisons we have to move things around.
It's not enough just to look at every element once and that's not enough just to sort it.
It's a little more sometimes a lot more complicated.
So just keep that in mind.
Again we're not explaining how we get this what the math is just yet but it will make sense in due time
I promise if you make it to the sorting sections.
So it is the slowest thing on here.
And then things like Map filter reduce for each or all.
And those are looping over each element or doing something with each element tallying it you know doing
a boolean test or just printing them out or whatever we're doing.
It just involves acting on each element or with each element.
So as the size of the array grows so does the amount of time it takes of it.
So you can see almost everything that we could do with an array all the built in methods not all of
them but all the ones listed here are.
And sorting takes longer and then push and pop are super fast.
Just like with basic accessing using an index super fast it's well constant time and they're much faster
than adding and removing from the beginning.
As we've talked about.
OK.
So that's a lot.
And remember you do not need to know all of this really the main takeaways here between objects in a
race.
One objects are fast at pretty much everything but there's no order to arrays are great when you need
an order but still be mindful that it's better if you can if you can do it to add and remove from the
end and avoid adding and removing from the beginning because that starts this cascade effect.
Hence the term shift and shift and everything else to be indexed and the same goes to adding and removing
from the middle you have to start another cascade a little tidal wave and things have to be very indexed
after whatever you added or removed.
All right.
So hopefully that makes sense how we get to these numbers what the values mean.
If not we'll be spending a lot more time talking about big-O as we go.
And this is really a primer for later on and we get to things like sorting or when we talk about length
lists and how they are also an ordered data structure.
But we can add and remove from the beginning and there's no problem it's constant time.
So how does that work.
So we'll get there.
That's coming up.
That's all I have to say about arrays and objects.
We're done for now.